---
layout: post
title:  "Plagiarism"
date:   2015-06-12 20:41:23
categories: McGill university plagiarism
---

Writing isn’t easy. In fact, when it comes to anything but technical writing, it’s a big chore for me. My brain isn’t the most organized place for cohesive thoughts. They tend to run into each other and jump from one thing to the next unexpectedly – and as a result, that’s what happens with my writing. I’m just hoping that by giving myself no other option but to write a few times per week, I’ll get a bit better. Maybe, one day, it’ll be a breeze to write a new blog post, no matter the subject matter. In the meantime, I recently read that writing about first-hand experiences is easier. That’s what I’ll do.

I spent a semester studying alongside those I called “doctor wannabes”: the med-school aspiring first-year students as of yet unphased by McGill’s grade deflation and impersonal approach to introductory courses. I did not have this aspiration. I laughed at their anxiety, and their obsessive mindset. Nevertheless, I admired their dedication. I’m not sure whether I studied just as hard as this bunch, but I performed quite well in the coursework I shared with the wannabes. Well enough, in fact, to attract a few looks of disgust from those that saw me as a potential threat to their not-yet-existent medical career. At the time, I laughed it off. I assumed that the back-stabbing nature of the program was universal to the university. I studied on my own: wrote my own color-coded notes, and organized my own reading schedule. In the rare occassion I was asked for help from another student, I obliged. A few weeks after I’d agreed to share my notes with another student in my organic chemistry class, I realized that he’d been using my notes in order to gauge whether I posted a threat and if I’d serve as a valuable ally. (When I told this particular classmate that I’d be switching into computer science at the end of the semester, he breathed a sigh of relief and told me that he was looking forward to no longer competing with me for a position in medical school.) Honest collaboration was rare – exchanges were made with care, and a careful threat assesment.

Needless to say, switching into computer science was a breath of fresh air. I could sit on the third floor of the computer science building about to button-mash and a friendly face would wander over to ask if I need help. It was intimidating to ask questions in class during my first year, but among my peers, everything was fair game. Whether I was stuck on an assignment, or just could not wrap my head around an important concept, I could turn to just about anyone and get a solid answer.

As a biology student, plagiarism wasn’t a very visible problem. Some students would bend the rules on take-home exams, but that was about it. In computer science, however, it’s a different ballgame. Assignments can be incredibly lengthy and depending on your courseload, downtime may or may not be a familiar concept. It’s extra tempting to ask a friend for a few lines of code when the clock is ticking and it seems as though you’re uncovering more bugs than you’re fixing. At McGill, I’d say most people I graduated with submitted some partially duplicated code at least once during their undergraduate career. Others just blatantly copy-pasted entire assignments. When your GPA is on the line, the temptation is overwhelming and academic integrity goes out the window.

As a witness to all of this, I began to worry about what constituted “cheating” on a programming assignment. Was I cheating by discussing the assignment with a friend? Was I cheating by having a second pair of eyes look over my code to help me find a pesky bug? Was I cheating by asking my father for feedback? Surely such practices shouldn’t be discouraged: this is how programmers work out in the real world. We’re all highly inter-dependent creatures, rarely programming in a silo; certainly professors should acknowledge that fact and it should be reflected in university policy.

Unfortunately, not all professors were equally tolerant of collaboration. In early courses, any discussion regarding an assignment was highly discouraged. Some seemed to be tolerant of collaboration or even encourage it, but with certain restrictions: code should not be identical, and if a solution (partial or whole) was built in collaboration with another student, each should name the other in the submission. For lengthier assignments, professors encouraged students to use just about any external library, so long credit was given where it was due.

But the “what if” remains: what if I were to copy an assignment? Would I even be caught? In my first programming class, the professor, albeit not very intimidating, attempted to discourage cheaters by warning us that all assignments were compared using departmental software before distributed to the teaching assistents for marking. I believed every word of it. When I was a teaching assistant for the course, three years later, there was no sign of this mysterious software. (Apparently this kind of software exists and compares variable names and whitespace, which is pretty smart.) Few students were penalized during my bachelor’s, but those that were received a warning or a failing grade, nothing major.

There was a heated discussion about the blurred lines of plagarism on the McGill Computer Science Facebook group a few months ago and it went something like this: “Where do we draw the line at plagiarism?” The majority of students seemed to agree that collaboration should be allowed but that obvious copying of assignments should not be tolerated. Others believed that while copying of assignments was not the most honest approach, it would eventually hurt the student on exams at a later date. One member went on to suggest that oral examinations should be brought back “à la old French way” (something I think could benefit students beyond identifying cheaters).

So what did I take away from this experience? The better option is a second pair of eyes; you won’t learn anything from submitting a copied assignment. You might get caught. You might get a failing mark, or worse, expelled. A little academic honesty can go a long way.

